Dalhousie University

Department of Psychology

28th Annual
In-House Convention
9-10 May 2002

Welcome to the 2002 Psychology and
Neuroscience In-House Convention

Welcome to the 28th Annual Dalhousie University Department of Psychology In-House
Convention.
Thanks should be extended to the In-House Convention Committee for the planning and
organization. The committee consists of the following individuals: John Connolly, Denise
Bernier, Jen Klages, Randy Newman, Robin Patterson, and Kris Peace. Special thanks to Denise
Robichaud.

Friendly Reminders

*Please bring your own mug for coffee or tea!
*All presentations are listed in the name of the presenter from the abstracts submitted.
*There will be pizza and beer at the end of Friday in the 2nd Floor Lounge.

NEW SCHEDULE with changes
Thursday, May 9, 2002 (LSC 4258)
9:00

Introduction to the In-House Convention -Richard Brown

9:30-10:30

SESSION1.
Tl) Susan Boehnke
T2) Frank Elgar
T3) Catherine Forestell
T4) Donald Mitchell

10:30-10:45 COFFEE
BREAK
10:45-12:00

SESSION2.
T5) Pam Loba
T6) Kelly Shoemaker
T7) Richard Brown
T8)
T9) Jason Ivanoff

12:00-

2:00 LUNCHBREAKANDPOSTERS
Pl) Jennifer Klages
P2) Jennifer Theakston
P3) Naomi Doucette
P4) Martin Williamson
P5) Cathy Stewart
Poster by Laura Reynolds

2:00-

3:30 SESSION3.
TIO) William Brown
Tl 1) Dennis Phillips
T12) Kristine Peace
T13) Tara Perrot-Sinai
T14) Sarah Boudreau
T15) Kyle Owens

Friday, May 10, 2002 (LSC 4258)

10:30-10:45
10:45-12:00

COFFEE BREAK

SESSION 4.

Tl 6)
Tl 7)
T18)
Tl 9)
T20)
12:00-2:00

John Christie
Marleen de Groot
Amanda Wintink
Cheryl Birch
Sherry Stewart

LUNCH BREAK AND POSTERS

P6) Mohammad R. Inanbu
P7) Sandra Sparkes
P8) Jill E. Hatchette
P9) Boris Kablar
P 10) Christianne Hawken
Pl 1) Tera Mosher
2:00-

3: 15 SESSION 5.
T21)
T22) Alicia Davis
T23) Andrea Gregus
T24) Denise Bernier
T25) Anna Lee

3:15- 3:30 COFFEE BREAK
3:30-

4:30-

4:30 SESSION 6.
T26) Jeremy Murphy
T27) Randy Newman
T28) Darcy Santor
T29) Denise Bernier
PIZZA AND BEER IN THE 2ND FLOOR PSYCHOLOGY LOUNGE

A Historical Instroduction to the In-House Conference
Richard Brown
Almost everyone who has been in the Psychology Department over the last 28 years has
given a presenation at the in-house conference. This introductory presentation will use
photographs from the last 28+ years to stimulate memories of previous conferences.
Photos of present and former faculty, students and PDF's in their most embarassing
moments will be presented. A prize to the person who can identify the most people.

Tl.

Segregating the scene: the effectiveness of sound localization cues on the formation
of auditory objects in time
Susan Boehnke and Dennis Phillips
The goal of the auditory system is to reconstruct sources in the acoustic scene and follow
them through time, i.e. the formation of separate auditory 'streams' or objects (after
Bregman, 1990). Differences in frequency, pitch, ear, or timbre can promote segregation
of two interleaved sounds, but little is known of the effectiveness of the auditory cues for
spatial location. In experiment l, subjects rated their perceptual experience of a repeating
A_ B_A_ sequence of spectrally-identical noise bursts, where A differed from B in
either ear of presentation, interaural level difference or interaural time difference (ITD).
In experiment 2, detection thresholds were obtained for a temporal asymmetry in each
type of ABA sequence, a task sensitive to stream formation. In both tasks, ITD was the
least effective spatial cue for segregation, despite the fact that it is the dominant cue used
for sound localization. The reason for this apparent mismatch will be discussed.

T2.

Dead Thesis Revival: Reforming Graduate Studies in Canadian Universities
Frank J. Elgar
In PhD programs in Canada, completion rates hover around 50%, less than 10% of
students who do finish do so within scheduled residencies, and mean times-to-completion
has nearly doubled during the last three decades from 6 to 11 years. Such inefficiency
creates significant costs to universities and to students. Reform is needed to address low
completion rates and lengthy times-to-completion. This presentation includes data from
US and Canadian PhD programs and a discussion about the personal, social, financial and
institutional factors that influence completion rates. A study is under way to examine the
relation between institutional regulations and resources and completion rates in PhD
programmes. Administrators of graduate studies from Canada, the United States and the
United Kingdom will participate in a mail-in survey. Implications of the results and
directions for further research will be discussed.

T3.

Palatability Shifts in Taste and Flavor Preference Conditioning
Catherine A. Forestell and Vincent M. LoLordo
Although rats acquire strong conditioned preferences for tastes and flavors paired with
glucose, it is not clear whether this occurs because of a shift in palatability to the CS or
whether the CS evokes an expectancy of postingestive reinforcement in test. The present
studies sought to determine whether preference conditioning enhanced CS palatability
using a taste reactivity procedure. Our results indicate that ingestive responses to taste
and flavor stimuli are enhanced as a result of differential preference conditioning.

T4.

Correlated Binocular Activity Guides Recovery From Monocular Deprivation
Donald Mitchell, Peter Kind, Bashir Ahmned, Colin Blakemore, Tobias
Bonhoffer and Frank Sengpiel
The mild effects of binocular as compared to monocular visual deprivation led to the
widely held view that the plasticity observed in the mammalian visual cortex during
development reflects the operation of competitive interactions for synaptic space
between inputs from the two eyes. However, during a subsequent period of binocular
vision there is substantial behavioural and physiological recovery, leading to the
suggestion that absolute activity levels, or some other non-competitive mechanism,
determine recovery from MD. Here we demonstrate that correlated binocular input is
essential for such recovery. Both behavioural and physiological (assessed by optical
imaging) recovery is far less complete if the two eyes are surgically misaligned after a
period of MD. This is a powerful demonstration of the importance of cooperative,
associative mechanisms in the developing visual cortex.

TS.

Planned Investigations of the Opiate-Mediated Reward Mechanisms Involved in
Pathological Gambling-Alcohol Use Disorder Co-Morbidity
Pamela Loba & Sherry Stewart
Alcohol abuse and pathological gambling are commonly co-morbid, yet little is known
about mechanisms underlying this co-occurrence. In a preliminary study (Stewart, Loba,
Blackburn, Ellery, & Klein, in press), we examined heart rate (HR) responses to video
lottery terminal (VL T) play and alcohol intake among a sample of regular VL T players.
The results of this pilot study replicated previous findings that gambling and alcohol
intake alone each result in increased HR. The results also provided novel information
that the combination of VLT play and alcohol further intensifies HR increase relative to
either activity alone. We have hypothesized that activity in the endogenous opiate system
may underlie both pathological gambling and alcohol use disorders and may help explain
their co-morbidity. We describe our plans for a set of three studies that will evaluate the
possible role of endogenous opiates. The first is a replication and extension of our pilot
study that controls for possible confounds (e.g., controls for movement artifact, use of
placebo control). The second study will evaluate levels of beta endorphin release (via
blood analyses) in response to VLT play, alcohol intake, and their combination in
pathological and non-pathological gamblers, and will determine the degree to which betaendorphin correlates with HR acceleration to each activity. Finally, a third study will
evaluate whether naltrexone (an opiate antagonist) blocks HR increase and positive mood
changes to VL T play, alcohol intake, and their combination in a sample of pathological
gamblers. Theoretical and clinical implications of this planned research will be discussed.

T6.

The impact of female reproduction on immunocompetence in the cricket
Kelly Shoemaker and Shelley Adamo
Animals may be selected to increase energy invested in reproduction at the expense of
other physiological systems such as immunity. We examined whether a trade-off was
evident between reproduction and immunity in the cricket, Gryllus texensis, by
comparing the immunocompetence of mated females with the number of eggs they
produced. Females will adjust egg output when presented with different egg-laying
substrates. Immunocompetence was measured by: 1) phenoloxidase (PO) activity in the
hemolymph; and 2) a functional assay analysing survival rates following infection with
the bacterium Serratia marcescens. Contrary to prediction, we found no evidence for a
difference in PO activity in the hemolymph of females laying significantly different
numbers of eggs. Additionally, preliminary data suggest that females laying high
numbers of eggs are, in fact, less likely to succumb to infection. These initial results
suggest that while reproduction may be costly, these costs are not at the expense of
immunity. Future studies will investigate a larger contrast in reproductive investment
with virgin and mated females.

T7.

Einstein meets Lenin in Brodmann's area 39
Richard Brown
This talk is based on my research after reading two books: Michael Paterniti (2000)
Driving Mr. Albert: A trip across America with Einstein's Brain, and Tilman Spengler
(1991) Lenin's Brain.
When Albert Einstein died on 18 April 1955, he was considered the greatest genius of his
time. His brain was removed for analysis by Dr. Thomas Harvey, who kept it in a jar in a
wooden box in his lab until the first research paper was published in 1985 (Diamond et
al., 1985. Exp. Neurol. 88, 198-204). Since that time there have been at least 8 papers,
two books, and numerous newspaper and magazine articles written about Einstein's
brain.
When Lenin died in January 1924, he was considered the greatest of geniuses. His brain
was removed and analyzed by Oskar Vogt, who was selected by a special advisory board
of the Soviet government. Vogt was a student of Haeckel and had worked for a year in
Paris with the Joseph and Marie Dejerine (one of the most famous medical couples since
the Curies), and from 1901-1910, Vogt and his wife Cecile (another famous medical
couple), supervised the neuroanatomical research of Korbinian Brodmann, whose famous
monograph "Localization in the Cerebral Cortex" was published in 1909 [English
translation 1994].These neuroanatomists are only some of those who have examined
"famous brains" as medical curiosities. What has been learned about the neural basis of
intelligence from this "cult of genius"? This talk will examine some of the history of
neuroscience related to the neuroanatomical analysis of famous brains.

TS.

Extrinsic cues provided by the extraocular striated muscle participate in the
determination of retinal cell fates
Boris Kablar
Dalhousie University, Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Halifax, Canada
Neural retinas of genetically modified mouse embryos entirely lacking extraocular
striated muscles are used to study in vivo the epigenetic role of extraocular muscle in the
genesis of retinal cell diversity. While retinal lamination and the total number of cells per
retinal layer appeared unaffected in amyogenic fetuses, electron microscopy and
histochemistry revealed the absence of cholinergic amacrine cell type. By contrast, the
amounts of other amacrine cell subpopulations (calretinin-, tyrosine hydroxylase- and
parvalbumin-expressing) were increased, whereas the amounts of Isletl/2-expressing
retinal ganglion cells were decreased. Surprisingly, it was not possible to detect any
change in proliferation or cell death. Consistently, the number of progenitors for retinal
ganglion cells (nestin- expressing precursors) were increased, whereas the amounts of
precursors for amacrine cells ( syntaxin- and VCI . I -expressing precursors) were
decreased in the mutant retinas. The difference in requirements for extraocular muscle
support in regulation of precise ratios of retinal neuronal cell types suggests an essential
role of extrinsic cues in the determination of retinal cell fates. Supported by NSERC
Canada.

T9.

Using speed-accuracy trade-off functions to explore the effect of inhibition of return
on information processing
Jason Ivanoff & Raymond Klein
In two tasks - a go/no-go task and a choice-RT task - we generated speed-accuracy
tradeofffunctions (SATFs) to examine the timecourse of the influence of inhibition of
return (IOR) upon target processing.
The SATFs were created by plotting accuracy as a function of response time. With the
go/no-go task, IOR was characterized by slower responses, an increase in criterion (C),
and a slight increase in sensitivity (d') at a relatively early portion of target processing.
In contrast, with the choice-RT task, IOR was characterized by slower responses at an
early portion of target processing and reduced accuracy at a late portion of target
processing. This pattern of results suggests that IOR increases the criterion to make a
response and it reduces the sensitivity of target processing during the relatively late
portion of target processing, but only with choice-RT tasks.

TlO.

Fearful Asymmetry: Genomic Imprinting and Family Conflict
William Michael Brown
Conflicts of interest may occur between mother's and father's genes within offspring due
to genomic imprinting (Haig, 2002). Genomic imprinting is the differential expression of
a gene depending upon the parent-of-origin in which the gene was inherited.
Specifically it appears that father's genes are predominantly expressed in the
hypothalamus (involved in homeostasis)/limbic system while mother's genes are
predominantly expressed in the neocortex (involved in flexible decision making). Haig
(2000) and Trivers (2000) have both suggested that genomic imprinting could mediate
conflicts over information transmission and reception within the brain. Keverne (2001)
has further hypothesized that maternal genes may have been selected for the
emancipation from endocrinological determinism mediated by paternal genes. It
is a tantalizingly (albeit speculative) idea that the occurrence of genomic imprinting
approximately 135 million years ago (MYA) in mammals may have indirectly facilitated
coevolutionary conflicts between genes and social learning. This paper will outline some
reasons to suspect that there are intragenomic conflicts over fear responses (e.g. fight
or flight). Neuroscientists have located specific neurotransmitters in the brain that are
involved in the suppression of agonistic responses. These transmitters and neural areas
appear (in part) to be maternally derived.

Tll.

Our Biggest Headache: The Body's Smallest Muscle
Dennis Phillips, Andrew Stuart and Michael Carpenter
The stapedius muscle of the middle ear holds the dubious distinction of being the smallest
muscle in the human body. It contracts reflexively in response to loud sounds, and the
result of the contraction is a directly measurable reduction in transmission of lowfrequency vibrations to the cochlea. Now, speech sounds are inherently broadband, and
at high intensities, the high-frequency content of the sounds is prone to masking by the
sound's low-frequency content. This is problematic because the high-frequency content
of speech carries much information on phoneme identity, so an inability to perceive the
high-frequency information is highly deleterious to speech perception. The stapedius
reflex thus has the beneficial consequence that at high stimulus intensities, highfrequency information is less masked than it would otherwise be by concurrent lowfrequency content in the sound. The main behavioral evidence on this view comes from
patients with Bell's palsy. Bell's palsy is thought to be an isolated pathology of the facial
nerve (the nerve that innervates the stapedius). In those patients, word recognition at the
affected ear(s) is often profoundly poorer at high stimulus intensities than it is at low
intensities. The explanation offered for this is that the high-frequency content of the
speech sounds is not afforded its usual protection from low-frequency masking when the
stimulus amplitudes are high. The present talk will describe two new experiments on the
stapedius reflex. These experiments provide independent, converging lines of evidence
on the role of the stapedius reflex in human hearing.

T12.

The Impact of the Interview: A Comparison of Traumatic and Positive Memory
Characteristics
Kristine A. Peace & Steve Porter
In the legal system, it is often important to evaluate the credibility of memories for distant
emotional experiences. The purpose ofthis study was to examine the characteristics of
both traumatic and positive emotional memories as a function of interview style.
Although previous studies have investigated the qualitative aspects of emotional
memories, little is known about the influence of differential modes of recall on memory
report characteristics and ratings of the psychological impact of the event. A comparison
of four commonly used police and therapeutic interview styles (free narrative, cognitive
interview, guided imagery, and written narrative) was conducted on both qualitative and
quantitative characteristics of traumatic and positive memories reported in a community
sample. Approximately 50 participants were interviewed at two time intervals. Further
analyses were conducted on the consistency of traumatic and positive memories over
time intervals of two to five months on a series of consistency questions and memory
ratings (e.g., quality of memory, vividness/clarity). Results have important implications
for understanding memory reports in the criminal justice system, and the variations in
memory reporting that occurs as a function of various interview protocols.

T 13. Uncovering The Mechanisms Establishing and Maintaining Sex Differences in Brain
and Behaviour
Tara Perrot-Sinai
Rodents provide a useful model system in which to study sex differences and gonadal
steroid action, at a behavioural and a cellular level. The importance of gonadal steroids
during development for organizing sexually dimorphic neural circuitry is well
established. However, until recently the molecular mechanisms underlying steroid action
in developing brain were not known. We have recently elucidated a pivotal role for
GABA in the developmental process of defining a male versus female brain. Once neural
circuitry is sexually differentiated during development, gonadal steroids 'activate' this
circuitry in adulthood resulting in behavioural sex differences. My current research focus
is studying how stress responding differs between the sexes. This research has relevance
for humans as the incidence of various stress-induced psychopathologies is higher in
women than men. Using a natural model of stress, I have demonstrated that male and
female rats differ in ethologically relevant behavioural responses and in neural activation
(using c-fos protein induction as a marker) following the stressor. Future experiments
will ( 1) examine sex differences in the effects of stress on cellular processes implicated in
the development of stress-induced psychopathologies, and (2) investigate a causal role for
gonadal steroids, both in adulthood and during development, in mediating sexually
dimorphic responses to stress.

T14. Mousing Around With Sensory Preconditioning: Part II
Sarah E. Boudreau and Vincent M. LoLordo
Little is known about the mouse's ability to associate neutral stimuli. Our research has
focused on sensory preconditioning using the albino CD- I mouse. Training consisted of
three phases. During Phase 1, mice were repeatedly presented with two pairs of odors.
Odors were presented in small odor pots covered in bedding. Following Phase 1
exposure, one odor from one pair was paired with a buried sugar reward (S+), and one
odor from the other pair was presented without sugar (S-). Mice learned to dig in the
bedding more to S+ than to S-. Finally, in Phase 3, mice were given a choice between the
two odors that had not been conditioned. If a mouse had indeed formed a bond between
the two odors in a pair during Phase 1, then the associate of S+ should have been the
preferred odor. In several experiments, the associate of S+ was not preferred, though in a
subsequent test, S+ was preferred to S-. In an effort to explain our failure to produce
sensory preconditioning, two more experiments were conducted looking at the possibility
of configuring and spontaneous configuring of odor compounds in Phase 1. Preliminary
results from these two studies will be discussed.

T15.

Excuse me, your face is interfering with my Inhibition of Return.
Kyle C. Owens
Is inhibition of Return (IOR) affected by the biological significance of the target? IOR
refers to the relative slowing of reaction times when responding to a target appearing in a
cued versus uncued location. As faces are typical targets of a visual search, facial images
were used as cues and targets and presented either intact as faces or scrambled as nonfaces. In Experiment 1 participants were presented with simplistic line and circle images
of faces and exhibited no evidence of IOR. Experiment 2 used realistic facial images and
IOR occurred only when a face was the target. Experiments 1 and 2 were repeated using
a simple circle as the cue, and IOR then occurred for both face and non-face targets.
Overall, IOR was affected by the complexity of the cue, and the biological significance of
the target was important only when the cue and target were complex.

T 16. There Is No Spatial Negative Priming
John Christie
All eight negative priming theories are based on a particular pattern of data, and most
necessarily require this pattern. The pattern derives from a congruency hypothesis, "if
items are congruent in a sequence of events then performance will be improved, else if
items are incongruent then performance will be impoverished." In examining other
relationships, besides those usually used to test negative priming, it was found that
negative priming for spatial locations is not what it was once believed to be. It behaves
more like inhibition of return, which does not follow a congruency hypothesis. This is
important given the number of"negative priming" experiments that have been performed
using the localization paradigm to test inhibition in populations. A reanalysis of location
negative priming experiments needs to be performed given because costs in location
negative priming are due to stimulation and not special treatment of the distractor.

T17.

Promiscuous (and Probably Perverted) Pairings of Peromyscus Produce a Plethora
of Peculiar Progeny.
Marleen H. M. de Groot & Benjamin Rusak
Light can affect daily rhythms by entraining the endogenous circadian pacemaker that
normally drives these rhythms, as well as by directly affecting (masking) the overt
expression of behaviour. A novel photopigment, melanopsin, is hypothesized to mediate
both of these effects, as well as pupillary responses to light, all of which survive loss of
classical photoreceptors in the retina. Last year, we described a California mouse
(Peromyscus ca/ifornicus) expressing a normal circadian rhythm that failed to entrain to
the light/dark cycle, but whose activity was completely masked by light exposure. We
have recently established that this mouse responds to visual stimuli and shows normal
pupillary constriction in response to light. This animal's phenotype appears to have a
genetic basis, since the progeny of selective crosses of his descendants showed similar
abnormalities. These mice are the first example of animals expressing apparently normal
circadian rhythms that are not entrained by light, but that still show potent masking
responses to light exposure.

T18.

Looking for BrdU-incorporated hippocampal cells in an animal model of
depression.
Amanda Wintink
Various theories exist regarding the aetiology of human depression. One theory of
depression is that it is due to stress-induced decreases in hippocampal neurogenesis
(Jacobs, Van Praag, & Gage, 2000). Support for this theory comes from observations of
decreased hippocampal volume in individuals with depression and also from data
showing that various antidepressant treatments in rodents increase hippocampal
neurogenesis. The present experiment was, therefore, designed to examine hippocampal
neurogenesis in animal model of depression. Olfactory bulbectomy (OBX) has been
shown to cause depression-like symptoms and may occur through stress-mediated
mechanisms. In the present experiment, adult male rats underwent OBX or sham
surgery. Six weeks after surgery rats received 4 injections of BrdU ( a marker of mitotic
activity; 50mg/kg, i.p.) and sacrificed 24 hrs after the last injection. Brains were
processed using immunohistochemistry for BrdU-:incorporated cell identification. The
results are discussed in relation to the neurogenesis theory of depression.

T19.

The Mood-Induced Activation of Alcohol Expectancies in Internally Motivated
Drinkers
Cheryl Birch, Sherry Stewart, Shondalee Eisnor, & Jennifer Theakston.
This study investigated whether Coping Motivated (CM) and Enhancement Motivated
(EM) drinkers differ in their activation of alcohol-related cognitions following exposure
to musical mood induction procedures (MMIP). A total of 86 undergraduates who had
elevated screening scores on either the CM or EM subscale of the Drinking Motives
Questionnaire (DMQ-R; Cooper, 1994) participated in this experiment. Half the people
in each motive group were randomly assigned to a positive mood condition and the other
half to a negative mood condition. The Alcohol Craving Questionnaire (ACQ; Singleton,
Tiffany & Henningfield, 1994) was administered at baseline and following the MMIP to
assess phasic changes in alcohol-related cognitions. After an ANCOV A was used to
adjust for motive-group differences in baseline mood state, it was evident that the
MMIP's induced the intended target moods for all groups. The mood induction operated
specifically to trigger different alcohol expectancies for CM and EM drinkers. Consistent
with hypotheses, planned comparisons revealed that only CM drinkers in the negative
(but not the positive) mood condition reported significant increases in expectancies that
alcohol would relieve negative mood states. Also consistent with hypotheses, only EM
drinkers in the positive (but not the negative) mood condition reported increases in
beliefs that alcohol would enhance positive affective outcomes. Theoretical and clinical
implications will be discussed.

T20.

In Win, Lose, and Booze: Implicit Gambling Outcome - Alcohol Associations
In Problem Gamblers
Sherry Stewart, Martin Zack (CAMH, ARF site), Pamela Loba, & Ray Klein
Although prior research shows that most gamblers drink alcohol while gambling, the
functional relationship between particular gambling events (e.g., wins, losses) and
alcohol use remains unknown. This study examined priming of alcohol cognition by
gambling gain and loss events among gamblers with differing histories of drinking in
response to these events. A stronger tendency to drink following a particular gambling
outcome (win, loss) was predicted to coincide with a stronger association between that
outcome and alcohol in memory, resulting in greater priming on an implicit association
task (!AT). Participants were community-recruited problem gamblers. On the IAT, gain
(e.g., winnings) and loss (e.g., bankrupt) words were paired with alcohol (e.g., vodka) or
non-alcohol (e.g., lemonade) words and participants made a category judgment (e.g.,
alcohol vs. non-alcohol) to each word by pressing one of two response keys. Participants
also reported how likely they were to drink when they won and lost at gambling.
Preliminary analyses indicate that history of loss-based drinking did not influence
priming of alcohol concepts by exposure to loss cues on the !AT. However, the predicted
association was observed between gain events and alcohol in those who reported a
history of win-based drinking.

T21.

Effect oflnsulin-like Growth Factor-1 on Functional Recovery Following Cerebellar
Injury.
Laura P.R. Reynolds and Gary V. Allen, Department of Anatomy & Neurobiology,
Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University
Introduction: Insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1) acts as a non-selective neurotrophic
agent in the adult brain in response to injury. IGF-1 has been shown to mediate levels of
Calbindin-28kD in Purkinje cells and promote climbing fiber re-innervation. Our aim was
to determine whether administration of exogenous IGF-1 following severe cerebellar
injury would enhance recovery of motor function. Methods: A weight drop model of
brain injury was used to induce severe damage to the left paravermal cerebellar cortex in
the anesthetized adult rat. Treatment animals (n=6) received 3 series of direct IGF-1
injections (l.25mg/kg) 2 mm deep into the cerebellar cortex immediately before injury
and 24 hour and 48 hours post-injury. Control animals (n=6) received severe injury
followed by a series of PBS injections (0.05 M, pH=7.4) into the cerebellar cortex. Sham
animals (n=4) received craniotomy without injury or injection. Animals were tested for
motor function using the beam-walking test. Results: Motor recovery rates were
significantly enhanced in treated animals compared to controls (p < 0.01). Animals that
received IGF-1 injections approached near recovery levels by day 15. In contrast, the
motor function of control animals failed to reach near recovery levels by day 29.
Conclusions: These findings suggest that post-injury treatment with IGF-1 is an effective
means of enhancing motor function following severe cerebellar injury. Analysis of brain
sections for the immunohistochemical detection of Hsp27, Calbindin-28kD, Parvalbumin
and Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3~ are currently in progress to reveal the role ofIGF-1 in
cell survival and to determine the intracellular mechanism of action of IGF-1. (Supported
by Nova Scotia Health Research Foundation)

T22.

Differential Effects of Kindling Different Brain Regions on Kindling-Induced
Emotionality
AC Davis, V Thome, A Gregus, AJ Wintink and LE Kalynchuk.
Amygdala kindling dramatically increases emotionality in rats and is considered a good
model of the behavioural changes associated with temporal lobe epilepsy. Less well
studied have been the effects of kindling other brain regions on changes in emotionality.
One study has shown that kindling the dorsal hippocampus causes increased emotionality
whereas caudate kindling does not (Kalynchuk et al, 1999). The purpose of this study
was to further study the effects of kindling both limbic and non-limbic regions on
kindling-induced emotionality. Rats were given either 99 kindling or sham stimulations
of the left amygdala, caudate, claustrum, bed nucleus of the stria terminal is (BNST), or
perirhinal cortex. After kindling the rats were tested on the open field, elevated plus
maze, and forced swim test. Amygdala-, BNST- and perirhinal-kindled rats showed
increases in emotionality on all tests compared to controls. In contrast, caudate and
claustrum kindling did not significantly increase emotionality. These results demonstrate
that kindling-induced emotionality is only produced by kindling of specific brain regions.

T23.

Effects of Repeated Corticosterone and Restraint Stress on Anxiety and Depressionlike Behavior in Male Rats.
Gregus A*, Davis, AD, Wintink, A J, Kalynchuk, LE
Repeated stress increases glucocorticoids and is associated with the development of
affective psychopathology in humans and maladaptive behavioral changes in rats. It is
well established that stress-induced corticosterone (CORT) impairs cognitive functioning
in rats; however, little is known about its effects on affective behavior. Accordingly, the
present study examined the effects of two repeated stressors, restraint and CORT
injections, on changes in emotional behavior in male rats. Rats received either CORT
injections (40mg/kg s.c.), vehicle injections, restraint stress (6hrs/day), or handling every
day for 21 days prior to and during behavioral testing. Starting on day 22, animals were
tested for changes in fearful/anxious behavior in the open field, and the elevated plus
maze, and for symptoms of depression in the forced swim test and sucrose consumption
test. Results revealed that neither CORT nor restraint altered motor or anxiety-related
behavior the open field or the elevated plus maze. However, CORT increased the
frequency and time spent immobile in the forced swim test compared to vehicle injected
controls. Additionally, CORT significantly decreased the proportion of sucrose-to-water
solution consumed compared to vehicle injected rats in the sucrose consumption test.
Restraint did not alter behaviors in the forced swim or sucrose consumption tests. These
results suggest that repeated CORT injections produce behaviors associated with
depression and that neither CORT nor restraint increase anxiety-like behavior in male
rats.

T24.

Evoked Potentials In Coma Populations
Bernier, D., Marchand, Y., Rahey, S., Striemer, C., Young, G. B., & Connolly, J. F.
A variety of electrophysiological protocols will be used to evaluate the functional state of
cortical and subcortical structures of patients in coma following traumatic head injury.
The population to be investigated will be patients between 18-50 years of age. Testing
will start as early as possible after the injury and will be repeated on a regular basis for a
period of six months. The battery of assessments includes Somatosensory Evoked
Potentials, Brain Stem Auditory Evoked Potentials, as well as Event-Related Potentials
associated with pre-conscious attention mechanisms(MMN) and higher level semantic
functions (N400). The ultimate goal is to investigate which measures will reliably predict
return to consciousness, and to investigate cognitive function in coma and at emergence.

T25.

Effect Of Postnatal Handling On The Emotional Behaviour Of Adult AmygdalaKindles Rats
Anna Lee & Lisa Kalynchuk
Long-term amygdala kindling in adult rats produces high levels of anxiety, and is often
used as an animal model for studying the emotionality associated with human temporal
lobe epilepsy. Brief handling in early-life decreases anxiety and the behavioural
responses to stressors encountered in adulthood. The present study examined whether
postnatal handling would reduce the development of emotionality in adult amygdalakindled rats. Male rats were handled for
the first 14 days of life or left undisturbed. At adulthood, rats were either left
undisturbed in their home cage or received sham stimulations, or 10, 25 or 60 amygdalakindling stimulations and were tested for changes in anxiety and depression. Kindling
produced increases in emotional behaviour, consistent with previously published
findings. However, postnatal handling had no effect on kindling-induced emotionality,
suggesting that variations in early environmental experience do not play a role in the
development of epilepsy-induced emotionality.

T26.

Caffeine-induced activation of orexin neurons
Jeremy A. Murphy and Kazue Semba
Neuroscience Program, and Departments of Anatomy & Neurobiology, and Psychology.
Caffeine is the most commonly used psychostimulant. Orexins are novel neuropeptides,
found in posterior hypothalamic neurons, which are suggested to participate in normal
wakefulness, feeding as well as in the neuropathology of the sleep disorder narcolepsy.
We investigated whether stimulant doses of caffeine activate orexin-containing neurons
in rats, using c-Fos as a neuronal activation marker. We confirmed that caffeine increased
locomotion at low doses (10 and 30 mg/kg), while inhibiting locomotion at a high dose
(75 mg/kg); saline had no effect. In the same animals, all doses of caffeine increased the
number of c- Fos expressing, orexin neurons by approximately 200%, whereas a similar
degree of activation of non-orexin neurons occurred only after the highest dose. These
results indicate that orexinergic neurons are selectively activated by stimulant doses of
caffeine, and suggest that the activation of orexin neurons, either directly or indirectly,
play a role in mediating behavioural activation by caffeine.

T27.

Evidence for Neural Plasticity Following Reading Remediation Training
Randy Lynn Newman
The present study recorded ERPs as participants, with and without phonological
processing deficits performed a modified phoneme deletion task. Participants in the
phonologically impaired (Pl) group were enrolled in a reading remediation program
(Spell Read) and were tested prior to receiving instruction and at specified time points
during the program (i.e., 20 hours, 40 hours, completion of program). Participants heard
instructions asking them to omit the initial phoneme from a monosyllabic word (e.g.,
Clap without the /Cl sound). This was followed (ISi = 2 sec) by presentation of the
correct (e.g., Lap) or incorrect answer (e.g., cap). In the control group, two ERP
components were elicited: the Phonological Mismatch Negativity (PMN), a component
linked to phonological analysis was largest to incorrect items, and the P300, a component
associated with memory recognition was largest to correct items. In the PI group, the
PMN and P300 responses were atypical (i.e., small, absent, delayed) prior to receiving
reading instruction. However, after only 20 hours of training, both the PMN and P300
responses began to normalize relative to the control group. These results have been
observed in both children and adults indicating that changes observed in children are not
solely the result of ongoing neural development.

T28.

"Eight Decades of Measurement in Depression"
Darcy Santor
Since 1930, some 400 instruments and measures have been developed to assess and
diagnose depression. These measures differ in content, response format and in
objectives. Although there are good reasons for constructing different measures of
depression, the large number of often diverse measures created over the past 80 years
creates its own challenge to one of the main goals of measurement, namely to standardize
assessment and streamline decision-making. The proposed talk reviews some of the many
important psychometric techniques and substantive developments that have impinged
directly on these measurement goals, including (a) the need for impossibility equating
different scales, (b) item content heterogeneity, and (c) potential difficulties associated
with the use of principal components analysis for developing short forms. Many of these
challenges can be resolved through the use of techniques based on item response models.

T29.

Sleep Deprivation Effects on Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy and Mood in Major
Depressive Disorder
Bernier, D., MacMaster, F., Gates, L., Kusumakar, V., Rusak, B.
A variety of studies using different methods of imaging brain structure and function have
reported changes associated with major depressive disorder (MOD). PET and functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have reported decreased metabolic activity in
the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (PFC), concurrently with increased activity in the
ventrolateral PFC. Differences in metabolic activity have also been reported in the
anterior cingulate, the temporal lobe, and some subcortical structures, including the
hippocampus and parahippocampus. Many of these abnormalities are reversed after
successful antidepressant treatments. Pharmacological treatments generally take weeks to
achieve their effects, making it difficult to identify the steps leading to these changes.
Partial overnight sleep deprivation has been shown consistently to produce transient but
very substantial mood improvement in more than 50% of patients suffering from MOD.
This provides an opportunity to study brain changes within hours of an effective
treatment. Single-proton, magnetic resonance spectroscopy (H-MRS) allows detection of
some neurochemical changes in targeted brain regions that are not detected by other
functional brain imaging methods. We have been using H-MRS to investigate the effects
on features of the MR spectra that represent levels of choline and levels of
glutamate/glutamine/GABA in several brain regions after sleep-deprivation induced
mood improvement. Preliminary results demonstrating rapid changes in brain
neurochemistry associated with mood improvement will be presented.

Pl.

A Case Study of the Effects of Neglect on Reading
J. Klages, J. Ingles & G. Eskes
SS is a 66 year-old white male who had a right hemisphere infarct affecting the basal
ganglia, posterior temporal and occipital lobes, associated with impaired left-sided
sensory and motor function and left hemi-spatial neglect. Clinical neuropsychological
screening with the Cognistat on admission to a Rehabilitation service showed no
evidence of dementia and severe left-sided neglect on the Behavioural Inattention Test.
Further testing of his neglect revealed evidence for neglect based on sensory/perceptual
rather than motor mechanisms, and object-centered left-sided errors or omissions,
suggesting a representational deficit. Neglect dyslexia was also seen in his reading errors
and omissions on the left side of single words. Interestingly, his reading errors were
significantly higher for regular words (13/30) and non-words (14/30), then for matched
irregular words (2/30), suggesting different forms of lexical representations and/or
processing as revealed by the differential effects of neglect. To our knowledge, this
difference between regular and irregular words has not been previously reported in the
literature and will be valuable in developing a fuller understanding of normal reading
processes as well as lexical neglect.

P2.

What does your personality say about your reasons for drinking?
J. A. Theakston 1, S. H. Stewart 1, M. Dawson 2 , D. Lehman2, S. Knowlden 2
The present study sought to replicate and extend research on the relationships between
five-factor personality models and motivations for drinking alcohol. Undergraduate
students (n = 571) completed the Drinking Motives Questionnaire-Revised (Cooper,
1994) and the 100-item International Personality Item Pool questionnaire (Goldberg,
1999) measuring the Big-Five personality domains. Multiple regression analyses
revealed that personality domains predicted both external (Conformity and Social), and
particularly, internal (Coping and Enhancement) drinking motives after accounting for
demographics and alternate drinking motives. Replicating previous findings with the
NEO personality scales, Coping motives were predicted by low Emotional Stability, and
Enhancement motives were predicted by high Extraversion and low Conscientiousness.
High Intellect/Openness and low Agreeableness also predicted Enhancement motives,
and low Extraversion predicted Coping motives. High Emotional Stability predicted
Conformity and high Agreeableness predicted Social motives. Low Intellect/Openness
also predicted both external motives. Thus, converging evidence suggests the presence of
personality risk factors associated with risky reasons for drinking.

P3.

11

An Investigation of the Ability of Individuals to Detect Deception in Criminal
Off enders. 11
Naomi Doucette
Because nearly all studies examining the detection of deceit have focused on university
student samples, the generalizability of the findings to forensic settings is questionable.
Given the importance of detecting deception in forensic settings, the present study
examined how well people were able to detect deception in a sample of incarcerated
criminal offenders. Undergraduate students (N = 103) viewed a series of eight
videotaped segments in which offenders related truthful or deceptive autobiographical
events of a positive or negative valence. The results illustrated that, contrary to the main
hypothesis, the participants were able to make accurate judgments about the veracity of
the statements at a level that was significantly above chance (M = 66%) and higher than
that seen in previous studies with non-offenders. In addition, it was found that
participants were most accurate at judging positive deceptive statements (76%).

P4.

Strain differences in locomotion, anxiety and spatial learning and memory
performance between C57BL/6J and 129S3 mice.
Martin Williamson
This study examined strain and sex differences in locomotion, anxiety and spatial
learning and memory in male and female C57BL/6J and 129S 1 mice using a behavioral
test battery. The elevated zero and elevated plus maze, light-dark box test and open field
indicated that the C57BL/6J mice had higher levels of locomotor and exploratory
behavior that the 129S1 mice, while the 129S1 mice demonstrated higher levels of
anxiety than the C57BL/6J mice. The Barnes maze and Morris water maze were used as
tests of spatial learning abilities. In the Morris water maze, there were no strain or sex
differences in latency to or distances to reach the platform, however the C57BL/6J swam
substantially faster than the 129S1 mice. During the probe trial, both C57BL/6J and
129S1 strains displayed more time spent in the correct quadrant, demonstrating that
learning had occurred, though there was no strain or sex difference noted. Strain and sex
differences in both neuromuscular function were shown as the C57BL/6J mice remained
on the rotating rod significantly longer than did the 129S 1 mice, while the females
performed better than the males. This study indicated that the 129S1 strain exhibit greater
levels of anxiety than C57BL/6J however can perform equally well as the C57BL/6J
mice under appropriate test conditions as shown in motor and spatial learning.
Nonetheless, more general conclusions on the abilities of the 129S1 strain cannot be
drawn, since variability between the 129 substrains exists and only one was tested here.

PS.

Response Patterns as a Function of Guilty Knowledge Related to a Mock Crime
Cathy Stewart, Stephen Porter, & Mary Ann Campbell
Although criminal investigations often hinge on the identification of deceptive
responding in suspects, little is known about the manner in which deceptive individuals
attempt to mask their knowledge of a crime. In the present study, N = 87 undergraduates
either: (a) committed a mock theft and had full knowledge of the crime (Perpetrators); (b)
had knowledge only of the crime-scene (Scene Witness); or (c) had no knowledge of the
crime or crime-scene (Naive Responders). All participants completed a questionnaire
about their knowledge of the theft - the Guilty Knowledge Questionnaire (GKQ).
Half of the perpetrators were instructed to avoid being caught (i.e., lie) on the GKQ,
while the remaining participants were instructed to respond honestly. Deceptive
Perpetrators reported less accurate knowledge (31%) than Honest Perpetrators (80%) and
Scene Witnesses (49%), but did not significantly differ from Naive Responders (29%).
Individuals attempting to mask knowledge of a crime may mirror the response patterns of
those naive to the crime and crime-scene. Implications for police interrogations are
discussed.

P6.

Contractile Activity Of Skeletal Musculature Involved in Breathing is Essential for
Normal Lung Organs Genesis
Mohammad R. Inanlou, G. Andrew M. Reid and Boris Kablar, Department of Anatomy
and Neurobiology
Mouse fetuses that develop without both Myf5 and MyoD entirely lack skeletal
myogenesis (i.e., amyogenic fetuses) and as a consequence perform no fetal breathing
movements (FBMs). By employing amyogenic fetuses we tested the hypothesised
influence of FBMs on cell fate and differentiation in the lung. To study cell
differentiation, we performed immunohistochemistry against surfactant protein (SP)-A, B, -C and AD.We also examined cell cycle kinetic, using immunohistochemistry against
proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and in situ detection of programmed cell death
(TUNEL). Mutant lung tissue was examined at pseudoglandular (embryonic day, E,
15.5), canalicular (E16.5) and terminal (E17.5-19.5) stage of lung development. We
found: (a) an underdeveloped alveolar system, (b) increased cell death, (c) decreased cell
proliferation and (d) down-regulated SP-D. In conclusion, our preliminary data
suggest that FBMs influence development of the terminal part of the bronchial tree,
where the gas exchange normally occurs, by controlling cell differentiation and
functional maturation and by affecting cell cycle kinetic through unknown
mechanochemical signal transduction pathways (Supported by an NSERC operating
grant to B. K.).

P7.

Neuroimaging Studies of Pediatric Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Sandra Sparkes, Frank P. MacMaster, Normand Carrey and Vivek Kusumakar
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder is a prevalent and debilitating illness affecting
3-6% of children. Past studies have implicated the cerebellum in the pathophysiology of
the illness. The corpus callosum has also been implicated in ADHD, although not
consistently. Methods: 13 ADHD children (7-11 years, 8 males, 5 females) and 13
healthy controls (7-11 years, 9 males, 4 females) underwent magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) scans. Results: Body I in the corpus callosum was significantly smaller in ADHD
children as compared to controls. No other corpus callosum region differed between
groups. Cerebellum vermis was also reduced in ADHD subjects as compared to controls.
Conc!usions: Reductions in Body I and the vermis may reflect the abnormalities noted in
motor behavior and inhibition respectively.

PS.

Pain and pain management: Attitudes and practices of adolescents.
Jill E. Hatchette, MSc, Patrick J. McGrath, PhD & Michael Murray, PhD
Objective: To describe adolescents' attitudes toward pain and pain management
strategies, knowledge of over-the-counter analgesics (OTCs) as well as the social
influences and gender differences apparent in pain management practices, attitudes
and knowledge.
Design: Focus groups.
Setting: Junior high school and the meeting room of a local mall.
Main Outcome Measures: Demographic data collected from participants via questionnaire prior to
focus group discussions. Content analyses of transcripts to interpret statements within the context of
categories formulated a priori from existing literature.
Participants: Junior high school adolescents (grades 7, 8 and 9) participated in the
sessions.
Results: Adolescents' attitudes toward OTCs ranged from negative (e.g. unnatural, over-used,
largely placebo) to positive (e.g. a preference to be pain free). Females indicated independence in
self-administering OTCs - a gender difference not attributable to onset of menstruation -both male
and female adolescents cited sports injuries as their most frequent pain-related complaint. With
respect to knowledge adolescents expressed importance of reading the label, but also based dosing
on irrelevant factors like perceived effect, size of pill and age estimation. Parental role in OTC use
included approval seeking, availability & talk (particularly to mother). Peer role in OTC use
included availability and talk. Gender differences were apparent in both parental and peer roles;
parents encouraged males to use physical methods of pain relief & females to take OTCs. In
discussing pain with peers males indicated more qualifiers; where females were likely to talk about
their pain "all the time", males tended to minimize pain that resulted from their own mishaps.
Conclusions: This study is the first of a series designed to understand adolescents' attitudes toward
pain & pain management strategies. The findings yield additional research questions to be
investigated in a second study addressing the emergence of attitudes within the family dynamic.

P9.

Glutamate Injection into the Rat Motor Cortex Conditions Against Subsequent
Brain Injury Induced Motor Dysfunction
Amanda Arnold and Gary V. Allen, Department of Anatomy & Neurobiology, Faculty of
Medicine, Dalhousie University

Introduction: Repetitive mild injury to the rat primary motor cortex has been shown to
produce a conditioning effect, so that subsequent severe injury to the same site has no
effect on motor function. The present study investigates whether local glutamate release
following repeated mild injury is a mechanism for this conditioning effect.
Methods: Adult male, Sprague-Dawley rats were trained on a beam-walking task, and
received a series of glutamate or phosphate buffered saline (PBS) injections, spaced three
days apart, into the rat hindlimb motor cortex. A second group of trained animals
received either glutamate or PBS injections and a subsequent severe brain injury three
days after the last injection.
Results: Animals with repeated PBS or glutamate injections showed no motor deficits in
the beam-walking task. Animals with repeated PBS injections followed by severe brain
injury had significant motor deficits, whereas animals with repeated glutamate injections
prior to severe brain injury had no significant motor deficits in the beam-walking task.
Groups of animals with either repeated glutamate or PBS injections and severe brain
injury had similar necrotic cavity volumes in the hindlimb region of the primary motor
cortex. Animals with repeated glutamate injections showed patterns of heat shock
protein 27 and glial fibrillary acidic protein expression that was similar to that seen
following repeated mild brain injury.
Conclusions: This data suggests that the conditioning effects on motor function seen
after repetitive mild brain injury may involve local glutamate release from injured
neurons and subsequent activation of secondary motor control sites. (Supported by the
Nova Scotia Neurotrauma Society)
PlO.

The Jax Phenome Project: Anxiety, Locomotion and Spatial Memory in A/J,
Balb/cByJ and Molf/ei mouse strains
Christianne Hawken, Krista Luedemann & Richard Brown
The purpose of this research was to create a comprehensive database of behavioral
phenotypes for inbred mouse strains. We examined the behaviour of twenty-four A/J,
Balb/cByJ and Molf/ei mice on measures of exploration, anxiety, learning and memory in
a standardized test battery (Brown et al., 2000). Anxiety-related behaviors were measured
using the elevated zero maze, elevated plus maze and light-dark box test. Exploration and
locomotor ability were tested in the open field and Rota Rod. Spatial memory was
examined using the Morris water maze and Barnes maze. There were significant
differences among the three strains. The A/J strain was the most anxious in the elevated
plus maze, elevated zero maze and the light/dark box. The Molf/ei had the greatest
locomotor ability and explored to a greater extent in the open field than the other strains.
In addition, the Molf/ei strain had the best spatial ability of the three strains in both the
Barnes maze and Morris water maze.

Pl 1.

Effect of Methylphenidate Hydrochloride (Ritalin) Administration on Locomtor
Activity, Emotional Behaviour and Spatial Learning in C3H/HeSnJ Mice
Tera M.Mosher & Richard E. Brown
Attention Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is a neuropsychological disorder prevalent in
3-5% of children. The three major characteristics of ADHD are hyperactivity, impulsivity
and inattention. Currently, ADHD is treated through a variety of methods, including the
use of psychostimulants. Ritalin is the treatment used by the majority of those diagnosed
with ADHD because it decreases hyperactivity allowing subjects to concentrate more
effectively. There are, however, few animal studies concerned with the effects of Ritalin
on behaviour. In particular, it is important to ensure that drugs which alter hyperactivity
do not impair cognitive function (e.g. Learning and Memory). The focus of the present
study is to determine the effects of Ritalin vs. saline injections on locomotor activity,
emotional behaviour and spatial learning in C3H/HeSnJ mice, which are not hyperactive.
These mice were tested in the elevated plus maze, open field and Morris water maze. In
the elevated plus maze the Ritalin-treated mice spent more time in the open arms than
saline-treated mice. In the open field, mice treated with Ritalin were significantly more
active than those treated with saline. In the Morris water maze there was no effect of
Ritalin treatment on the latency to reach the platform. From these results we conclude
that Ritalin increases locomotor activity, and decreases emotionality, but does not effect
spatial learning and memory. Our next experiment will compare the effects of MPH on
the hyperactive coloboma mouse with those of the control mice. We expect that MPH
will reduce locomotor activity in these mice.

